Dashboard
Introduction
Notified Gram Nyayalayas
Operational Gram Nyayalayas
Fund Released by DOJ
Pending cases (Civil)
Pending cases (Criminal)
Gram Nyayalaya Act 2008
Guidelines of Gram Nyayalaya Schemes
Gram Nyayalaya Related Orders
The Law Commission of India, in its 114 th Report, had suggested
establishment of Gram Nyayalayas for providing affordable and quick access to
justice to the citizens at their doorsteps. The Gram Nyayalayas Bill was passed by
the Parliament on 22nd December 2008 and the Gram Nyayalayas Act came into
force with effect from 02nd October, 2009. The Act extends to the whole of India,
except to the States of Nagaland, Arunachal
Pradesh, Sikkim and to the tribal areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the
Table below paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India within
the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram, respectively.
2. Some of the salient features of the Gram Nyayalayas Act are as follows:
3. At the time of drafting the proposal for Gram Nyayalayas, it was envisaged
that Gram Nyayalayas would be set up in the country at the intermediate panchayat
level. A scheme of central assistance was formulated simultaneously to fund the
initial cost in terms of non-recurring expenses for setting up of these courts with
the assistance limited to Rs. 18.00 lakhs per Gram Nyayalaya as a one-time
measure. Central Government also decided to bear 50% of the recurring expenses
of these courts subject to a ceiling of Rs. 3.2 lakhs per court per annum during the
first three (3) years of their operations.
4. The scheme has since been extended by the Government for five years from
01.04.2021 to 31.03.2026 at a budgetary outlay of Rs.50 crores allocated for the
Gram Nyayalayas Scheme. Henceforth, the funds for the Gram Nyayalayas will be
released only after they have been notified as well as made operational alongwith
the appointment of Nyayadhikaris and reported on the Gram Nyayalayas Portal of
the Department of Justice. A review of the performance of Gram Nyayalayas will
be done after one year to assess its efficacy as an institution in providing speedy
and affordable justice to the rural marginalised.