Print
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Linkedin
National Event – Overview
The Department of Justice (DoJ) launched a year-long campaign, “HAMARA SAMVIDHAN HAMARA SAMMAN,” on 24th January 2024 to commemorate India’s 75th year as a Republic. The campaign aims to enhance awareness about the Constitution, sensitize citizens on Panch Pran principles, and educate them about their rights, duties, and entitlements.
Key themes of the campaign include Sabko Nyay-Har Ghar Nyaya, Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp, and Vidhi Jagriti Abhiyaan. The Sabko Nyaya -Har Gahr Nyaya sub-campaign aims to cover 2.5 lakh+ Gram Panchayats through Village level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) of Common Service Centers, encouraging citizens to read Panch Pran Pledge in regional languages. It also witnessed to organize citizen centric-service melas called “Jan Sewa Janta ke Dwar” and conduct workshop on legal services across States/ UTs. Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp involves citizens participating in online activities, such as reading Panch Pran Pledge, quiz on Constitution, poster-making, and reel-making competitions. Vidhi Jagriti Abhiyaan focuses on ensuring a steady flow of legal information to citizens through various modes, including law students empowering citizens through engaging activities.
The event also saw the release of the DISHA Achievement booklet for 2021-2023 and the formalization of collaborations with Bhashini to build multi modal interface to address the legal queries of the citizens in their own language. DoJ also entered into partnership with IGNOU t The Campaign was launched by Hon’ble Vice-President of India, in the august presence of Hon’ble Minister of State (I/C) for Law and Justice, Hon’ble Attorney General of India along with Vice Chancellor (IGNOU) and Secretary (Justice), at Bhim Auditorium of Dr Ambedkar International Centre.
650+ participants comprising of law students, law teachers, representatives from different Ministries/ Departments, NALSA, paralegals, VLEs and officials from CSC, media etc., attended the event. 70 Lakh + audience was reached through different social media handles (YouTube, X, Face book, Instagram, Print and electronic media). This year long pan India campaign aims to reach the State/ Regional level, and every nook and corner of society.