Print
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Linkedin
Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp- Overview
The Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp Campaign is an initiative aimed at raising awareness on the principles of Panch Pran and the Constitution among citizens, especially the youth, utilizing the MyGov platform. The campaign comprises four engaging activities:
Sankalp Saaksharta:
About: Hosted on the MyGov platform, citizens can read and take the Panch Pran
Pledge: E-certificates will be rewarded upon taking the pledge.
Timeline: January 2024 to January 2025
Participants: Citizens of India, including DISHA Functionaries, Students, and Teachers of Pro Bono Clubs and Implementing Agencies of LLLAP.
Expected Outcome: Increased awareness and participation among citizens on the theme of Panch Pran.
Quiz-Samvidhan:
About: Online quiz on the Constitution hosted on the MyGov platform. Participants will receive e-certificates
Timeline: January 2024 to March 2024
Participants: Citizens of India, including DISHA Functionaries, Students, and Teachers of Pro Bono Clubs and Implementing Agencies of LLLAP.
Expected Outcome: Increased awareness and participation among citizens on the Constitution.
Panch Pran Rangostav:
About: Online poster competition on the theme of Panch Pran. Top entries will receive certificates, and winning posters will be published on Ministry of Law and Justice social media handles.
Timeline: January 2024 to April 2025
Participants: Citizens of India, including DISHA Functionaries, Students, and Teachers of Pro Bono Clubs and Implementing Agencies of LLLAP.
Expected Outcome: Increased awareness and participation among citizens. Best poster will be used for campaigning and for DoJ Calendar and IEC materials.
Panch Pran Anubhav:
About: Selfie video competition and social media campaign focusing on Panch Pran. Participants can share videos talking about Panch Pran.
Timeline: January 2024 to April 2025
Participants: Citizens of India, including DISHA Functionaries, Students, and Teachers of Pro Bono Clubs and Implementing Agencies of LLLAP.
Expected Outcome: Increased awareness and participation among citizens on various themes of Panch Pran.
Join us in this exciting campaign to ignite a sense of pride and commitment towards our nation’s values and principles! Let’s together build a stronger, more informed citizenry for a brighter future.
or