Last updated: 24-02-2022
Salaries, gratuity, pension, allowances etc. in respect of Judges of Supreme Court are governed by the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958.  Salaries etc. of Judges of High Courts are governed by High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954.  An amendment in the Acts is required whenever there is any proposal for revision of salaries/pension gratuity, allowances etc. in respect of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts.
Salaries and allowances of Judges of Supreme Court and High Court were last revised w.e.f. 1.1.2006 consequent upon the recommendations of 6thCPC.
Pursuant to the implementation of the report of 7thCPC by Central Government in respect of civil servants, the Chief Justice of India (CJI) constituted a Committee of three sitting Judges to recommend revision in the salaries and other service conditions for the CJI and Judges of Supreme Court and Chief Justices of High Courts.
The report of Judges Committee, received by the Government on 21.9.2016, was sent to Finance Ministry for examination. Hon’ble Finance Minister, vide letter 28.11.2016, conveyed comments of his Ministry.   A proposal was sent to Cabinet Sectt. for seeking the approval of Union Cabinet for revision of pay, allowances and pension of High Court and Supreme Court Judges.
The Union Cabinet chaired by the Hon’ble Prime Minister approved the proposal for revision in the salaries, gratuity, allowances, pension etc. of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts on 22.11.2017.
A Bill was introduced in the Parliament on 21.12.2017 for amendment in the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 and High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954.  The Bill was passed by Parliament and enacted after the assent of the Hon’ble President.
Consequent upon amendment of both the Acts mentioned above, Department of Justice vide letter dated 30.01.2018 issued necessary instructions to all State Governments/UTs, Accountants General of all States and Registry Supreme Court to revise the pay, allowances and pension of all sitting and retired High Court and Supreme Court Judges.
Revised rates of Salary, Allowances and Pension of Supreme Court and High Court Judges w.e.f. 01.01.2016 are as under:-
Further increase of HRA @ 27% when Dearness Allowance (DA) crosses 25% and @ 30% when DA crosses 50% has also been agreed to by Cabinet.
The Salaries, Pension and Allowances of the Supreme Court Judges are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, whereas the Salaries and Allowances of the High Court Judges are charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the States and the Pension is charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI
Developed and hosted byNational Informatics Centre,Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, Government of India
Last Updated:Aug 11, 2025