Print
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Linkedin
National Legal Services Authority
What kind of legal services are provided? The Free Legal Services include:- Payment of court fee, process fees and all other charges payable or incurred in connection with any legal proceedings; Providing service of lawyers in legal proceedings; Obtaining and supply of certified copies of orders and other documents in legal proceedings. Preparation of appeal, paper book including printing and translation of documents in legal proceedings.
The Free Legal Services include:-
Payment of court fee, process fees and all other charges payable or incurred in connection with any legal proceedings;
Providing service of lawyers in legal proceedings;
Obtaining and supply of certified copies of orders and other documents in legal proceedings.
Preparation of appeal, paper book including printing and translation of documents in legal proceedings.
Who is eligible for legal aid? Or Criteria for provding free legal aid? Persons eligible for getting free legal services include:- Women and children; Members of SC/ST Industrial workmen Victims of mass disaster, violence, flood, drought, earthquake, v) industrial disaster. Disabled persons. vii) Persons in custody Persons whose annual income does not exceed Rs. 1 lakh (in the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee the limit is Rs. 1,25,000/-). The income limit for legal aid is under revision. Victims of Trafficking in Human beings or begar.
Persons eligible for getting free legal services include:-
Women and children;
Members of SC/ST
Industrial workmen
Victims of mass disaster, violence, flood, drought, earthquake, v) industrial disaster.
Disabled persons. vii) Persons in custody
Persons whose annual income does not exceed Rs. 1 lakh (in the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee the limit is Rs. 1,25,000/-). The income limit for legal aid is under revision.
Victims of Trafficking in Human beings or begar.
Where to approach for legal aid? In 1987, the Legal Services Authorities Act was enacted by the Parliament which came into force on 9th November, 1995 to establish a nationwide uniform network for providing fee and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on the basis of equal opportunity. The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) has been constituted at National level to monitor and evaluate implementation of legal aid programmes and to lay down policies and principles for making legal services available under the Act. In every State, a State Legal Services Authority and in every High Court, a High Court Legal Services Committee have been constituted to provide legal aid in relation to the High Courts. District Legal Services Authorities and Taluka Legal Services committees have been constituted in the Districts and in most of the Talukas to give effect to the policies and direction of the NALSA and to provide free legal services to the people.
In 1987, the Legal Services Authorities Act was enacted by the Parliament which came into force on 9th November, 1995 to establish a nationwide uniform network for providing fee and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on the basis of equal opportunity. The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) has been constituted at National level to monitor and evaluate implementation of legal aid programmes and to lay down policies and principles for making legal services available under the Act.
In every State, a State Legal Services Authority and in every High Court, a High Court Legal Services Committee have been constituted to provide legal aid in relation to the High Courts. District Legal Services Authorities and Taluka Legal Services committees have been constituted in the Districts and in most of the Talukas to give effect to the policies and direction of the NALSA and to provide free legal services to the people.
Is legal service really free? Does one has to pay something? Legal Service is provided free of cost to the eligible people and one has not to pay any thing to the lawyers.