Print
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Linkedin
1st Regional Event – Overview
The Department of Justice (DoJ) organized first regional event on 09 March 2024 to commemorate India’s 75th year as a Republic at Maharaja Ganga Singh University in Bikaner, Rajasthan. The event was in continuation of the national year-long campaign launched by the Vice President on January 24, 2024, in New Delhi.
The event featured the official release of innovations to spearhead legal services at the grassroots, such as the “Nyaya Sahayak” program for 500 Aspirational blocks of India. The event also showcased a special women edition of Voices of Beneficiaries and a State Booklet of Rajasthan, which reflected the growth and coverage of the Tele-Law program. The event also featured dignitaries addressing the importance of human dignity and the need for technological advancement in India.
The event also featured addresses by dignitaries, including Hon’ble MoS (I/C) for Law and Justice and Guest of Honour, followed by a keynote address by Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, Chief guest.
The Hon’ble MoS for Law and Justice (I/C) highlighted the importance of human dignity in the Constitution of India and the need for technological advancement in India. He emphasized the initiatives of the Supreme Court of India, such as video conferencing, translation of Supreme Court judgments in Hindi languages, and improving district judiciary infrastructure. Contributions of Common Service Centers and the role of 8 grass root functionaries were highlighted in taking forward the Hamara Samvidhan campaign to the citizens. He also appreciated 75 advocates from the Bikaner Bar Association for their legal services.
The Hon’ble CJI addressed the audience to break the bondages of mental subjugation and champion the inherent dignity of individuals. He also emphasized the role of technology in bringing social change for women without compromising their family responsibilities. Highlighting the importance of the Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman campaign, the Hon’ble CJI urged citizens to form “Samvidhan Katta” to foster constitutional discussions and uphold liberty, equality, and justice. He called for a human chain of support, encouraging citizens to spread the message to 10 new individuals, who would take it forward to another 10 more citizens. for legal awareness and empowerment.
The event was attended by 900 participants, including representatives from various sectors, including the Bar Association, judicial officers, advocates, and field-level Tele-Law program officials.