Print
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Linkedin
Website Policies
1. Hyperlinking Policy
At many places in this website, you shall find links to other websites/portals. The links have been placed for your convenience. Department of Justice is not responsible for the contents and reliability of the linked websites and does not necessarily endorse the views expressed in them. Mere presence of the link or its listing on this Portal should not be assumed as endorsement of any kind. We cannot guarantee that these links will work all the time and we have no control over availability of linked pages. We do not object to you linking directly to the information that is hosted on this site and no prior permission is required for the same. However, we would like you to inform us about any links provided to this Portal so that you can be informed of any changes or updations therein. Also, we do not permit our pages to be loaded into frames on your site. The pages belonging to this site must load into a newly opened browser window of the User.
2. Copyright Policy
Material featured on this Portal may be reproduced free of charge after taking proper permission by sending a mail to us. However, the material has to be reproduced accurately and not to be used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Wherever the material is being published or issued to others, the source must be prominently acknowledged. However, the permission to reproduce this material shall not extend to any material which is identified as being copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material must be obtained from the departments/copyright holders concerned.
3. Privacy Policy
Department of Justice does not automatically capture any specific personal information from you, (like name, phone number or e-mail address), that allows us to identify you individually. If the Department of Justice requests you to provide personal information, you will be informed for the particular purposes for which the information is gathered and adequate security measures will be taken to protect your personal information. We do not sell or share any personally identifiable information volunteered on the Website to any third party (public/private). Any information provided to this website will be protected from loss, misuse, unauthorized access or disclosure, alteration, or destruction. We gather certain information about the User, such as Internet protocol (IP) addresses, domain name, browser type, operating system, the date and time of the visit and the pages visited. We make no attempt to link these addresses with the identity of individuals visiting our site unless an attempt to damage the site has been detected.
4. Terms and Conditions
This website designed and hosted by National Informatics Centre. Website Content provided by the Department of Justice. Though all efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy and currency of the content on this website, the same should not be construed as a statement of law or used for any legal purposes. Incase of any ambiguity or doubts, users are advised to verify/check with the secretariat and/or other source(s), and to obtain appropriate professional advice. Under no circumstances will this secretariat be liable for any expense, loss or damage including, without limitation, indirect or consequential loss or damage, or any expense, loss or damage whatsoever arising from use, or loss of use, of data, arising out of or in connection with the use of this website. These terms and conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Indian Laws. Any dispute arising under these terms and conditions shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of India. Department of Justice is not responsible for any third-party website that carries its content in any form or manner whatsoever.