Print
Share on Facebook
Share on X
Share on Linkedin
Second National Judicial Pay Commission
The Supreme Court of India on 09.05.2017 in Writ Petition No.643/2015 directed to appoint a Judicial Pay Commission to review the pay scales, emoluments and service conditions of the Judicial Officers of Subordinate Judiciary in India. Accordingly, with the approval of the Cabinet, the Government notified setting up of the SNJPC on 16.11.2017 under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice (Retd.) P.VenkataramaReddi, former Judge of Supreme Court of India. Member- Mr. Justice (Retd.) R. Basant, former Judge of Kerala High Court. Member Secretary (to be chosen by the Commission, preferably a Judicial Officer).
The Supreme Court of India on 09.05.2017 in Writ Petition No.643/2015 directed to appoint a Judicial Pay Commission to review the pay scales, emoluments and service conditions of the Judicial Officers of Subordinate Judiciary in India. Accordingly, with the approval of the Cabinet, the Government notified setting up of the SNJPC on 16.11.2017 under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice (Retd.) P.VenkataramaReddi, former Judge of Supreme Court of India.
Member- Mr. Justice (Retd.) R. Basant, former Judge of Kerala High Court.
Member- Mr. Justice (Retd.) R. Basant, former Judge of Kerala High Court.
Member Secretary (to be chosen by the Commission, preferably a Judicial Officer).
Member Secretary (to be chosen by the Commission, preferably a Judicial Officer).
SNJPC has submitted their report to this Department on dated 04.02.2020. A copy of report has been submitted to Supreme Court of India and to State Governments.  The recommendations of SNJPC are under consideration of Supreme Court of India.  This Department has filed its views/comments on the recommendations of SNJPC in the Supreme Court of India on 22.06.2020.
SNJPC has submitted their report to this Department on dated 04.02.2020. A copy of report has been submitted to Supreme Court of India and to State Governments.  The recommendations of SNJPC are under consideration of Supreme Court of India.  This Department has filed its views/comments on the recommendations of SNJPC in the Supreme Court of India on 22.06.2020.
The recommendations of SNJPC shall be considered by this Department in respect of judicial officers of the Union Territories in consultation with Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and necessary orders will be issued to Union Territories to revise the pay and allowance of Judicial Officers under their administrative control.
The recommendations of SNJPC shall be considered by this Department in respect of judicial officers of the Union Territories in consultation with Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and necessary orders will be issued to Union Territories to revise the pay and allowance of Judicial Officers under their administrative control.
TABLES:
Part I Vol I (Pay Structure) Download (6 MB)
Part I Vol IA (Annexures) Download (9 MB)
Part I Vol II (Pension) Download (2 MB)
Part I Vol III (Allowances) Download (5 MB)
Part I Vol IV (Summary) Download (679 KB)
Part II (Permanent Mechanism) Download (458 KB)
Part III (Suplemental Report) Download (1 MB)
Part IV (Work Methods and Work Environment) Download (8 MB)