Latest News
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for Evaluation of “Legal Aid Defense Counsel System" Scheme - reg. New
Nyayika Patrika released by Secretary (Justice) on 8th May, 2025 in Jaisalmer House. New
Nomination of the Executive Chairman, National Legal Services Authority. New
Grant of additional instalment of Dearness Relief (DR) to the retired Judges of Supreme Court/High Courts and family pensioners of such Judges – revised rates effective from 01.01.2025. New
Grant of Dearness Allowance (DA) to the Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts- Revised Rates effective from 01.01.2025. New
Sexual Harrasment of women at work place - Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) in the Department of Justice.
About Department
As per the Allocation of Business (Rules), 1961, Department of Justice is a part of Ministry of Law & Justice, Government of India. It is one of the oldest Ministries of the Government of India. Till 31.12.2009, Department of Justice was part of Ministry of Home Affairs and Union Home Secretary had been the Secretary of Department of Justice. Keeping in view the increasing workload and formulating many policies and programmes on Judicial Reforms in the country, a separate Department namely Department of Justice was carved out from MHA and placed under the charge of Secretary to Government of India and it started working as such from 1 st January, 2010 under the Ministry of Law & Justice. The Department is housed in the Jaisalmer House, 26, Man Singh Road, New Delhi. The Organizational setup of the Department includes 04 Joint Secretaries, 07 Directors/ Deputy Secretaries and 11 Under Secretaries. The functions of the Department of Justice include the appointment, resignation and removal of the Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Chief Justices and Judges of the High Courts and their service matters. In addition, the Department implements important schemes for Development of Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary, setting up of Special Courts for speedy trial and disposal of cases of sensitive nature (Fast Track Special Court for cases of rape and POCSO Act), E-court Project on computerization of various courts across the country, legal aid to poor and access to justice, financial assistance to National Judicial Academy for providing training to the Judicial Officers of the country. The functions of Department of Justice are given in Allocation of Business (Rules), 1961
Whats New
Order of Appointment of Shri Justice Partha Sarathi Sen and 01 other Addl. Judges as Permanent Judges of Calcutta High Court (08.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Justice Biswaroop Chowdhury and 06 others Addl. Judges as Addl. Judges of Calcutta HC for a fresh term of one year (08.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Justice Harinath Nunepally and 03 other Addl. Judges as Permanent Judges of Andhra Pradesh High Court. (08.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri G. Basavaraja, Addl. Judge as a Permanent Judge of Karnataka High Court (08.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Justice Ravindra Kumar Agrawal, Addl. Judge as a Permanent Judge of Chhattisgarh High Court (08.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Vimal Kumar, Judicial officer as a Judge of Delhi High Court (08.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Pramod Kumar Srivastava and 04 other JOs as Judge of Allahabad High Court (04.08.2025)
Corrigendum to Notification dated 04.03.2025 regarding appointment of Smt. Manjusha Ajay Deshpande, Addl. Judge of Bombay HC (01.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Tuhin Kumar, Advocate as an Addl. Judge of Andhra Pradesh High Court (01.08.2025)
Order of appointment of Shri Virinder Aggarwal and 9 other JOs as Addl. Judge of P&H High Court (01.08.2025)
Profile
Citizen Services
National Judicial Data Grid
Search Judgements & Orders
Virtual Justice Clock
Know Your Case Status
Live Streaming Of Court Cases
Settle Your Traffic Violation
Reports & Documents
Divisions
Appointments
National Mission for Justice Delivery & Legal Reforms
Access to Justice
eCourts
Justice-I
Justice-II
Administration
Important Links
Chairman, Parliamentary Standing Committee
Department of Legal Affairs
Legislative Department
Supreme Court of India
India Code
National Judicial Academy
National Legal Services Authority
e-Committee, Supreme Court of India
Legal Information Management & Briefing System (LIMBS)
Tweets
Photo Gallery