Last updated: 13-08-2024
A Plan Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms is being implemented by the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms since 2013. Under the Scheme, financial assistance is being extended for undertaking action research / evaluation / monitoring studies, organizing seminars / conferences / workshops, capacity building for research and monitoring activities, publication of report/material, promotion of innovative programmes / activities in the areas of Justice Delivery, Legal Research and Judicial Reforms. From the financial year 2021-22 onwards, the Scheme was incorporated under the “non-scheme” component of Department of Justice.
Reputed institutions working in the field of justice delivery, legal education and research and judicial reforms may apply as per the Scheme guidelines. The Guidelines prescribed format and other details about the Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms can be accessed below :
– A Plan Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms is being implemented by the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms since 2013. Under the Scheme, financial assistance is being extended for undertaking action research / evaluation / monitoring studies, organizing seminars / conferences / workshops, capacity building for research and monitoring activities, publication of report/material, promotion of innovative programmes / activities in the areas of Justice Delivery, Legal Research and Judicial Reforms. From the financial year 2021-22 onwards, the Scheme was incorporated under the “non-scheme” component of Department of Justice.
– The eligible implementing authorities for the Scheme are Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA), Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Indian Institute(s) of Management (IIMs), Indian Law Institute (ILI), National Law Universities (NLUs), National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER), National Judicial Academy (NJA), State Judicial Academies (SJAs) and other reputed institutions working in the field of justice delivery, legal education and research and judicial reforms.
PDF:Click Here
– Under the Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms, financial assistance shall be extended for undertaking action research/evaluation/monitoring studies, organizing seminars/conferences/workshops, capacity building for research and monitoring activities, publication of report/ material, promotion of innovative programmes/activities in the areas of Justice Delivery, Legal Research and Judicial Reforms.
The objectives of the scheme are to promote research and studies on the issues related to the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms being implemented by the Department of Justice.
Financial assistance shall be given to the eligible implementing agencies by the Department of Justice for the following projects/activities in the fields of Justice Delivery, Legal Research and Judicial Reforms:
Indian Institute of Public Administration, Administrative Staff College of India, Indian lnstitute/s of Management, Indian Law Institute, National Law Universities, National Council of Applied Economic Research, National Judicial Academy, State Judicial Academies and other reputed institutions working in the field of justice delivery, legal education and research and judicial reforms.
The Project Sanctioning Committee shall be empowered to allow any Government or Government aided Institute/Organisation as eligible implementing agency, if found suitable for undertaking project/activity permissible under the scheme.
Financial assistance shall be given, on agreed terms and conditions, to the eligible implementing agency on the basis of Project Proposal submitted by such agency indicating the project cost.
The financial assistance may be given in instalments and at least 10% of the project cost may be kept for payment as final instalment on acceptance of the final project report by the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms, Department of Justice.
The financial assistance would be limited to actual expenditure incurred by the grantee institution, subject to overall ceiling of Rs.25.00 lakhs.ln exceptional cases, however, where the scope of the Project is sufficiently wide, sample size is large and Project is for longer duration, the Project Sanctioning Committee may relax this ceiling.
The project proposal shall be invited by the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms, Department of Justice from the selected implementing agencies for identified subjects which shall include following informationas terms and conditions of the project:
All project proposals shall be placed before the Project Sanctioning Committee for consideration and approval. The composition of the Project Sanctioning Committee shall be asunder:
Secretary, Department of Justice – ChairmanAdditional Secretary & Financial Advisor, DoJ – MemberSecretary General, Supreme Court – MemberJoint Secretary and Mission Director, DoJ – MemberJoint Secretary, Law Commission of India – MemberDirector, lndian Law Institute – MemberDirector, National Judicial Academy – MemberDirector/Deputy Secretary (National Mission), DoJ – Member Secretary
While considering the proposals from Indian Law Institute (ILI) and National Judicial Academy (NJA) , the Directorsof the concerned Institute / Academy shall recuse from deliberations of Project Sanctioning Committee in respect of their proposals.
The invited Proposals from the selected institutes/organisations on the identified subjects shall be placed before Project Sanctioning Committee for consideration and approval. The decision of Project Sanctioning Committee shall be final and binding. The approved Project Proposals shall then be submitted to the Integrated Finance Division of Ministry of Law and Justice for approving the project/s and release of funds. Each instalment shall be released on the approval of IntegratedFinance Division.
The implementing agency shall be required to submit Utilisation Certificate, as prescribed by the Department of Justice, for the funds received from the Department of Justice for undertaking the project.
Any dispute relating to any project shall be decided by the Secretary(Justice) and MissionLeader, National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms, Department of Justice, which shall be binding on the implementing agency.
(Sd/-) Deputy Secretary to the Government of India
PDf –Click Here (PDF 510KB)(Published Date: 16.10.2023)
Project Sanctioning Committee headed by Secretary (Justice) considers the project proposals and approves the research projects. Project Sanctioning Committee consists of members from Supreme Court, Indian Law Institute, National Judicial Academy, Law Commission of India and Internal Finance Department. Rs.25.00 lakh is the maximum limit of the project cost.
Total Number of Projects completed and accepted (till 31.06.2024): 44
Final Reports
Step1:-NITI Aayog NGO darpan Portal (Registration for Voluntary Organizations (VOs)/ Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)/ Registered Companies & Institutions for approved action research projects) –Click here
Step2:-DOJ GRANT-IN-AID PORTAL (DOJ Registration for approved Action Research Project) –Click here
Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI
Developed and hosted byNational Informatics Centre,Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, Government of India
Last Updated:Aug 11, 2025