The Chief Justice of India would send his recommendation for the appointment of a puisne Judge of the High Court as Chief Justice of that High Court or of another High Court, in consultation with the two senior- most Judges of the Supreme Court. He would also ascertain the views of the seniormost colleague in the Supreme Court who is conversant with the affairs of the High Court in which the recommendee has been functioning and whose opinion is likely to be significant in adjudging the suitability of the candidate. It is of no consequence whether the Judge of the Supreme Court, so consulted, had that High Court as Parent High Court or was transferred there from any other High Court.
The views of the Judges of the Supreme Court thus consulted would then be sent by the Chief Justice of India alongwith his proposal, to the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
Annexure- I (i)
(Para-12)
*Confidential Reports of last 15 years, to the extent written, should invariably be annexed by the High Court.
**Preference indicated, however, would not restrict appointment/transfer to any other High Court.
Annexure- I (ii)
(Chief Justice of the High Court)
Annexure- II
I hereby certify that I have examined Shri..…………………………………… and cannot discover that he has any disease (communicable or otherwise); constitutional weakness or bodily infirmity, which would disqualify* him except ….……………………………………………………………… I do not consider this disqualification* for employment as Judge of a High Court.
Signature:
Date:
Designation:
Signature of Candidate:
* Note: This certificate should take into account the fact that a High Court Judge retires at the age of 62 years.
Annexure- III
I hereby certify that my date of birth is ……………………………………… (here enter date of birth according to the English calendar) and in support thereof, I enclose ……………………………………………… the following documents:-
I shall submit separately.
A certified extract from: –
(a) the Birth Register;
(b) the School Register;
(c) the College Register; and
(d) the Service Book.
Signature of candidate
Date:
Note: If any of the documents is not available, please say so against it.
Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI
Developed and hosted byNational Informatics Centre,Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, Government of India
अंतिम अद्यतन:Aug 11, 2025