Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) | Department of Justice | India Search Search Accessibility Tools Accessibility Tools Color Contrast High Contrast Normal Contrast Highlight Links Invert Saturation Text Size Font Size Increase Font Size Decrease Normal Font Text Spacing Line Height Other controls Screen Reader Hide Images English हिन्दी विधि और न्याय मंत्रालय, भारत सरकार Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India न्याय विभाग DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Menu Toggle More Home About Us History About Department Vision and Mission Functions of Department Organization Chart Administrative Setup Who’s Who Monthly Achievements Citizens’ Charter Acts and Rules Website Information Manager Administration of Justice Appointment of Judges Latest Orders of Appointment, Transfer etc. Memorandum of procedure of appointment of Supreme Court Judges Memorandum of procedure of appointment of High Court Judges List of Supreme Court Judges List of High Court Judges List of Chief Justice of the High Court Vacancy Positions High Courts Principal Seats and benches Justice-I Pay, Allowance and Pension First National Judicial Pay Commission Second National Judicial Pay Commission Memorandum of Understanding signed with other countries Pecuniary Jurisdiction of Delhi District Courts Use of Hindi and regional languages Redressal of Public Grievances Guidelines of Grievances Justice-II Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) About Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) Portal Special Courts for MP/MLA About Special Courts for MP/MLA Portal Sanctions Fast Track Court About Fast Track Court Portal Family Court About Family Court Portal National Judicial Academy About National Judicial Academy Website PFMS National Mission National Mission for Justice Delivery & Legal Reforms Vision Document Advisory Council CSS Judicial Infrastructure – Nyaya Vikas Ease of Doing Business Gram Nyayalaya Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms Vacancy Position in District and Subordinate Courts eCourts MMP Dashboard Phase-I Phase-II Phase-III Composition of eCommittee eCommittee Newsletters eCourts Achievements Computerization and WAN connectivity CIS and COVID Management Software Patch The National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) Virtual Courts Video Conferencing Live Streaming eFiling e-Payments eSewa Kendra eCourt Services Judgment Search Portal National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTEP) Justice Clock Secure, Scalable & Sugamya Website as a Service (S3WAAS) Digitization of Records Information, Education & Communication (IEC) Awards and Recognition MIS Portal for CPCs (Official Use Only) WAN Monitoring Portal (Official Use Only) Training and Awareness Programs PFMS Access to Justice Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice Tele Law About Tele Law Portal Pamphlet In Media Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono Legal Services) About Activities In Media Pamphlet Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono) Portal Legal Literacy & Legal Awareness About IEC Material Brochure Pamphlet Leaflet Webinars In Media Digital Library Information in Different Languages Videos National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) About NALSA Portal Grants-in-aid to NALSA Legal Aid Defense Counsel System (LADCS) Scheme Samvidhan@75 About Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman portal Sabko Nyay- Har Ghar Nyaya Overview Activities Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp Overview Activities Vidhi Jagriti Abhiyan Overview Activities Samvidhan Katta About Guidelines for Submission Media Event National Event Overview Media Gallery 1st Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 2nd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 3rd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 4th Regional Event Overview Media Gallery Gallery Photos Videos Media Corner Press Release Photo Gallery Video Gallery Events Dashboard Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) Tele-Law Other Programmes Others Parliament Questions Notices Recruitments Tenders Right to Information (RTI) PFMS Orders Schemes – Consolidated Guidelines Close Home Administration of Justice Justice-II Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) Print Share on Facebook Share on X Share on Linkedin Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) Last updated: 20-06-2025 Championing the cause of safety and security of women and girl child, the Government provided for stringent punishment including death penalty for perpetrators of rape by passing the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018. Incidents of sexual offences and prolonged trials of accused necessitated dedicated court machinery to provide immediate relief to the victims. Since October 2019, the Department of Justice is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, to set up Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) including exclusive POCSO Courts across the nation for expeditious trial relating to sexual offences. Each court comprises of 1 Judicial Officer and 7 Staff Members. Out of 31 States and UTs eligible, 30 have joined this scheme. Puducherry made a special request to join the Scheme and the one exclusive POCSO Court was operationalized in May, 2023. The Scheme was initially for a period of one year spread over two Financial Years 2019-20 and 2020-21 at a total outlay of Rs.767.25 Cr. with Rs.474.00 Cr. as Central Share to be met from Nirbhaya Fund. The Cabinet approved the continuation of the Scheme for two years i.e. up to March, 2023 with a total budgetary outlay of Rs.1572.86 Cr. with Rs.971.70 Cr. as central share. The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 28.11.2023 has further extended the Scheme for another three years – from 01.04.2023 to 31.03.2026, at a total financial outlay of Rs.1952.23 Cr. including Rs.1207.24 Cr. as Central Share to be incurred from Nirbhaya Fund. In F.Y. 2019-20, Rs.140.00 Cr.; in F.Y. 2020-21 Rs.160.00 Cr.; in F.Y. 2021-22, Rs.134.56 Cr.; in F.Y. 2022-23, Rs.200.00 Cr.; in the F.Y. 2023-24, Rs.200.00 Cr.; and in F.Y. 2024-25, Rs. 200.00 Cr. was released to States/UTs as Central Share. As on May, 2025, 747 FTSCs including 406 exclusive POCSO (ePOCSO) Courts are functional in 30 States / UTs which have disposed of more than 3,30,000 pending cases. During the F.Y. 2025-26, an allocation of Rs.200.00 Cr. has been made as Central share of funds for the functioning of such FTSCs in the States/UTs. For the robust implementation of the Scheme, this Department has created an online monitoring framework for monthly monitoring of case statistics. Regular review meetings with the Registrar Generals of High Courts and State functionaries are being undertaken. FTSC scheme Guidelines (1MB) For more information visit https://dashboard.doj.gov.in/fast-track-special-court/ Website Policies Hyperlinking Policy Copyright Policy Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Feedback Contact Us Help FAQ WIM Visitor Summary Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI Developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre , Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology , Government of India Last Updated: Aug 11, 2025 Certified Quality Website