उच्चतम न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति का प्रक्रिया ज्ञापन | Department of Justice | भारत खोजें खोजें Accessibility Tools Accessibility Tools Color Contrast उच्च कंट्रास्ट सामान्य कंट्रास्ट Highlight Links Invert Saturation Text Size फ़ॉन्ट आकार बढ़ाएं फ़ॉन्ट का आकार घटाएं सामान्य फ़ॉन्ट Text Spacing Line Height Other controls Screen Reader Hide Images हिन्दी English विधि और न्याय मंत्रालय, भारत सरकार Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India न्याय विभाग DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Menu Toggle और मुख्य पृष्ठ विभाग के बारे में इतिहास विभाग के बारे में विजन और मिशन विभाग के कार्य संगठनात्मक चार्ट प्रशासनिक सेटअप कौन क्या है मासिक उपलब्धियां नियम और अधिनियम सिटीजन चार्टर वेबसाइट सूचना प्रबंधक न्याय का प्रशासन न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति नियुक्ति एवं स्थानांतरण आदि के आदेश उच्चतम न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति का प्रक्रिया ज्ञापन उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति का प्रक्रिया ज्ञापन उच्चतम न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की सूची उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की सूची रिक्तियों की स्थिति उच्च न्यायालयों के मुख्य न्यायाधीशों की सूची उच्च न्यायालयवार रिक्तियाँ उच्च न्यायालयों की प्रधान सीट एवं खंडपीठें न्याय-I वेतन, भत्ता और पेंशन पहला राष्ट्रीय न्यायिक वेतन आयोग दूसरा राष्ट्रीय न्यायिक वेतन आयोग अन्य देशों के साथ हस्ताक्षरित समझौता ज्ञापन दिल्ली जिला न्यायालयों का आर्थिक क्षेत्राधिकार हिन्दी और क्षेत्रीय भाषा का उपयोग जन शिकायतों का निवारण न्याय-II फास्ट ट्रैक स्पेशल कोर्ट MP/MLA के लिए विशेष न्यायालय फास्ट ट्रैक कोर्ट कुटुंब न्यायालय राष्ट्रीय न्यायिक अकादमी राष्ट्रीय न्यायिक अकादमी, भोपाल राष्ट्रीय न्यायिक अकादमी पोर्टल पीएफएमएस नेशनल मिशन न्याय प्रदायगी और विधिक सुधार का राष्ट्रीय मिशन विजन दस्तावेज सलाहकार परिषद सीएसएस न्यायिक ढांचा न्याय विकास व्यापार में आसानी ग्राम न्यायालय न्यायिक सुधार पर कार्य अनुसंधान और अध्ययन की योजना जिला और अधीनस्थ न्यायालयों में रिक्तियों की स्थिति ई-कोर्ट एमएमपी डैशबोर्ड परियोजना-I परियोजना-II परियोजना-III ई-समिति की संरचना ई-समिति समाचार ई-कोर्ट की उपलब्धियां कम्प्यूटरीकरण और वैन कनेक्टिविटी सीआईएस और कोविड प्रबंधन पैच राष्ट्रीय न्यायिक डाटा ग्रिड (एनजेडीजी) वर्चुअल अदालतें वीडियो कॉन्फ्रेंसिंग लाइव स्ट्रीमिंग ई-फाइलिंग ई-पेमेंट ई-सेवा केंद्र ई-कोर्ट सेवाएँ जजमेंट सर्च पोर्टल नेशनल सर्विस एंड ट्रैकिंग ऑफ इलेक्ट्रोनिक प्रोसेसज (NSTEP) जस्टिस क्लॉक S3WAaS प्लेटफॉर्म की विशेषताएं अभिलेखों का डिजिटीकरण सूचना, शिक्षा और संचार (आईईसी) पुरस्कार और मान्यता सीपीसी के लिए MIS पोर्टल (केवल कार्यालय प्रयोग हेतु) WAN मॉनिटरिंग पोर्टल (केवल कार्यालय प्रयोग हेतु) प्रशिक्षण और जागरूकता कार्यक्रम पीएफएमएस न्याय तक पहुँच डिजाइनिंग इनोवेटिव सोल्युशन फॉर होलिस्टिक एक्सेस टू जस्टिस (DISHA) टेली लॉ योजना बारे में टेली-लॉ पोर्टल पत्रिका न्याय बंधु (प्रो-बोनो लीगल सर्विस) बारे में न्याय बंधु गतिविधियां मीडिया में पुस्तिका न्याय बंधु (प्रो-बोनो) पोर्टल विधिक साक्षारता और विधिक जागरूकता बारे में आईईसी सामग्री विवरणिका पुस्तिका पत्रिका वेबिनार डिजिटल पुस्तकालय विभिन्न भाषाओं में जानकारी वीडियो राष्ट्रीय विधिक सेवा प्राधिकरण (नालसा) बारे में नासला पोर्टल नालसा को सहायता अनुदान संविधान@75 हमारा संविधान हमारा सम्मान के बारे में सबको न्याय-हर घर न्याय अवलोकन गतिविधियाँ नव भारत नव संकल्प अवलोकन गतिविधियाँ विधि जागृति अभियान अवलोकन गतिविधियाँ मिडिया गैलरी फोटो गैलरी वीडियो मीडिया कॉर्नर प्रेस विज्ञप्ति फोटो गैलरी वीडियो गैलरी इवेंट्स आजादी का अमृत महोत्सव राष्ट्रीय विधिक सेवा प्राधिकरण टेली-लॉ अन्य कार्यक्रम AV कार्नर अन्य संसदीय प्रश्न नोटिस नियुक्ति निविदाएं सूचना का अधिकार पीएफ़एमएस आदेश योजना – समेकित दिशानिर्देश English हिन्दी Close मुख्य पृष्ठ न्याय का प्रशासन न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति उच्चतम न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति का प्रक्रिया ज्ञापन Print फेसबुक पर साझा करें Share on X Share on Linkedin उच्चतम न्यायालय के न्यायाधीशों की नियुक्ति का प्रक्रिया ज्ञापन The Chief Justice of India and the Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President under clause (2) of Article 124 of the Constitution. CHIEF JUSTICE OF INDIA : 2. Appointment to the office of the Chief Justice of India should be of the seniormost Judge of the Supreme Court considered fit to hold the office. The Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs would, at the appropriate time, seek the recommendation of the outgoing Chief Justice of India for the appointment of the next Chief Justice of India. 2.1 Whenever there is any doubt about the fitness of the seniormost Judge to hold the office of the Chief Justice of India, consultation with other Judges as envisaged in Article 124 (2) of the Constitution would be made for appointment of the next Chief Justice of India. 2.2 After receipt of the recommendation of the Chief Justice of India, the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs will put up the recommendation to the Prime Minister who will advise the President in the matter of appointment. JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT : 3. Whenever a vacancy is expected to arise in the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of India will initiate proposal and forward his recommendation to the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs to fill up the vacancy. 3.1 The opinion of the Chief Justice of India for appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court should be formed in consultation with a collegium of the four seniormost puisne Judges of the Supreme Court. If the successor Chief Justice of India is not one of the four seniormost puisne Judges, he would be made part of the collegium as he should have a hand in selection of Judges who will function during his term as Chief Justice of India. 3.2 The Chief Justice of India would ascertain the views of the seniormost Judge in the Supreme Court, who hails from the High Court from where the person recommended comes, but if he does not have any knowledge of his merits and demerits, the next seniormost Judge in the Supreme Court from that High Court should be consulted. 3.3 The requirement of consultation with a Judge of the Supreme Court would not be confined to that Judge only who has that High Court as a parent High Court and, therefore, would not exclude Judges who have, on transfer, occupied the office of a Judge or Chief Justice of that High Court. 3.4 The opinion of members of the collegium in respect of each of the recommendations as well as the seniormost Judge in the Supreme Court from the High Court, from which a prospective candidate comes, would be made in writing and the Chief Justice of India, in all cases, must transmit his opinion as also the opinion of all concerned to the Government of India as part of record. If the Chief Justice of India or the other members of the Collegium elicit views, particularly those from the non-Judges, the consultation need not be in writing but he, who elicits the opinion, should make a memorandum thereof and its substance in general terms which should be conveyed to the Government of India. 3.5 After receipt of the final recommendation of the Chief Justice of India, the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs will put up the recommendations to the Prime Minister who will advise the President in the matter of appointment. 4. As soon as the appointment is approved, the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice will inform the Chief Justice of India and obtain from the person selected a certificate of physical fitness signed by a Civil Surgeon or a District Medical Officer. The Medical Certificate is to be obtained from all persons selected for appointment whether they are at the time of appointment in the service of the State or not. The certificate should be in the form annexed. 5. As soon as the warrant of appointment is signed by the President, the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice will announce the appointment and issue the necessary notification in the Gazette of India. APPOINTMENT OF ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE : 6. Appointment of acting Chief Justice is to be made by the President under Article 126 of the Constitution. Vacancy in the office of the Chief Justice must be filled whatever the period of vacancy. In such an eventuality, the seniormost available Judge of the Supreme Court will be appointed to perform the duties of the office of the Chief Justice of India. As soon as the President has approved the appointment, the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice will inform the Chief Justice of India or in his absence the Judge concerned of the Supreme Court, and will announce the appointment and issue the necessary notification in the Gazette of India. APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC JUDGES : 7. Article 127 of the Constitution provides that if at any time there should not a quorum of Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court the Chief Justice of India may, with the previous consent of the President and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned request, in writing, a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to attend, for such period as may be necessary, the sittings of the Supreme Court . Whenever the necessity for such an appointment arises, the Chief Justice of India will consult the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned whether a Judge is available to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court. The Chief Justice of the High Court will communicate his consent to the release of a particular Judge after consulting the Chief Minister of the State in which the High Court is situated. The Chief Justice of India will then communicate to the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs the name of the Judge and the period for which he will be required to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court, certifying that the release of the Judge has been agreed to by the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and the Chief Minister of the State. The Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs will put up the recommendation to the Prime Minister, who will advise the President as to the person to be appointed to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court. As soon as the President gives his consent to the appointment, the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice will (i) inform the Chief Justice of India, who will formally request the Judge concerned, in writing, to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court as an ad hoc Judge and (ii) announce the appointment and issue the necessary notification in the Gazette of India. ATTENDANCE OF RETIRED JUDGES AT SITTINGS OF THE SUPREME COURT: 8. Under Article 128 of the Constitution, the Chief Justice of India may, at any time, with the previous consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court. Whenever, the necessity for such an appointment arises, the Chief Justice of India will informally sound the retired Judge, whom he proposes to recommend, as to the latter’s willingness to serve and will there upon communicate to the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs the name of the Judge and the period for which he will be required to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court. If the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs considers it desirable to bring any point to the notice of the Chief Justice of India or to suggest some other name, he may by personal correspondence convey his suggestions to the Chief Justice of India. On obtaining the views of the Chief Justice of India finally the Union Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs will put up the proposal to the Prime Minister who will advise the President as to the person to be appointed to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court. As soon as the President gives his consent to the appointment, the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice will inform the Chief Justice of India and will announce and issue the necessary notification in the Gazette of India. ANNEXURE FORM OF MEDICAL CERTIFICATE (Please see paragraph 4) I hereby certify that I have examined Shri Justice………………………………………………… and can not discover that he has any disease (communicable or otherwise), constitutional weakness or bodily infirmity, which would disqualify* him for employment as Judge of the Supreme Court except ……………………………………………………………I do not consider this a disqualification* for employment as Judge of the Supreme Court. SIGNATURE: DESIGNATION: Dated……………………. Signature of Candidate ……………………… * Note: This certificate should take into account the fact that a Supreme Court Judge retires at the age of 65 years. वेबसाइट नीतियां नियम और शर्तें प्रतिक्रिया हमसे संपर्क करें सहायता अक्सर पूछे जाने वाले प्रश्न वेब सूचना प्रबंधक आगंतुक सारांश Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI Developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre , Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology , Government of India अंतिम अद्यतन: Aug 11, 2025 Certified Quality Website