Phase-III | Department of Justice | India Search Search Accessibility Tools Accessibility Tools Color Contrast High Contrast Normal Contrast Highlight Links Invert Saturation Text Size Font Size Increase Font Size Decrease Normal Font Text Spacing Line Height Other controls Screen Reader Hide Images English हिन्दी विधि और न्याय मंत्रालय, भारत सरकार Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India न्याय विभाग DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Menu Toggle More Home About Us History About Department Vision and Mission Functions of Department Organization Chart Administrative Setup Who’s Who Monthly Achievements Citizens’ Charter Acts and Rules Website Information Manager Administration of Justice Appointment of Judges Latest Orders of Appointment, Transfer etc. Memorandum of procedure of appointment of Supreme Court Judges Memorandum of procedure of appointment of High Court Judges List of Supreme Court Judges List of High Court Judges List of Chief Justice of the High Court Vacancy Positions High Courts Principal Seats and benches Justice-I Pay, Allowance and Pension First National Judicial Pay Commission Second National Judicial Pay Commission Memorandum of Understanding signed with other countries Pecuniary Jurisdiction of Delhi District Courts Use of Hindi and regional languages Redressal of Public Grievances Guidelines of Grievances Justice-II Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) About Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) Portal Special Courts for MP/MLA About Special Courts for MP/MLA Portal Sanctions Fast Track Court About Fast Track Court Portal Family Court About Family Court Portal National Judicial Academy About National Judicial Academy Website PFMS National Mission National Mission for Justice Delivery & Legal Reforms Vision Document Advisory Council CSS Judicial Infrastructure – Nyaya Vikas Ease of Doing Business Gram Nyayalaya Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms Vacancy Position in District and Subordinate Courts eCourts MMP Dashboard Phase-I Phase-II Phase-III Composition of eCommittee eCommittee Newsletters eCourts Achievements Computerization and WAN connectivity CIS and COVID Management Software Patch The National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) Virtual Courts Video Conferencing Live Streaming eFiling e-Payments eSewa Kendra eCourt Services Judgment Search Portal National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTEP) Justice Clock Secure, Scalable & Sugamya Website as a Service (S3WAAS) Digitization of Records Information, Education & Communication (IEC) Awards and Recognition MIS Portal for CPCs (Official Use Only) WAN Monitoring Portal (Official Use Only) Training and Awareness Programs PFMS Access to Justice Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice Tele Law About Tele Law Portal Pamphlet In Media Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono Legal Services) About Activities In Media Pamphlet Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono) Portal Legal Literacy & Legal Awareness About IEC Material Brochure Pamphlet Leaflet Webinars In Media Digital Library Information in Different Languages Videos National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) About NALSA Portal Grants-in-aid to NALSA Legal Aid Defense Counsel System (LADCS) Scheme Samvidhan@75 About Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman portal Sabko Nyay- Har Ghar Nyaya Overview Activities Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp Overview Activities Vidhi Jagriti Abhiyan Overview Activities Samvidhan Katta About Guidelines for Submission Media Event National Event Overview Media Gallery 1st Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 2nd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 3rd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 4th Regional Event Overview Media Gallery Gallery Photos Videos Media Corner Press Release Photo Gallery Video Gallery Events Dashboard Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) Tele-Law Other Programmes Others Parliament Questions Notices Recruitments Tenders Right to Information (RTI) PFMS Orders Schemes – Consolidated Guidelines Close Home eCourts MMP Dashboard Phase-III Print Share on Facebook Share on X Share on Linkedin Phase-III Cabinet approves eCourts Phase III for 4 years The Union Cabinet chaired by the Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has approved the eCourts Project Phase III as a Central Sector Scheme spanning four years (2023 onwards) with financial outlay of Rs.7210 crore. In line with the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji’s “Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas and Sabka Vishwas”, eCourts Mission Mode Project is the prime mover for improving access to justice using technology. As part of the National eGovernance Plan, the e-Courts Project is under implementation since 2007 for ICT enablement of the Indian Judiciary the Phase II of which has concluded in 2023. Phase III of the e-Courts Project in India is rooted in philosophy of “access and inclusion”. Taking the gains of Phase-I and Phase-II to the next level, the e-Courts Phase-III aims to usher in a regime of maximum ease of justice by moving towards digital, online and paperless courts through digitization of the entire court records including legacy records and by bringing in universalization of e-Filing/ e-Payments through saturation of all court complexes with e-Sewa Kendras. It will put in place intelligent smart systems enabling data-based decision making for judges and registries while scheduling or prioritizing cases. The main objective of the Phase-III is to create a unified technology platform for the judiciary, which will provide a seamless and paperless interface between the courts, the litigants and other stakeholders. The Central Sector Scheme of eCourts Phase III is being implemented under the joint partnership of Department of Justice, Ministry of Law & Justice, Government of India and eCommittee, Supreme Court of India, in a decentralized manner through the respective High Courts to develop a judicial system that would promote ease of justice by making the system more accessible, affordable, reliable, predictable, and transparent for all stakeholders. Components of eCourts Phase III are as follows:- S.No. Scheme Component Cost Estimate (Total (In Rs. Cr.) 1. Scanning, Digitization and Digital Preservation of Case Records 2038.40 2. Cloud Infrastructure 1205.23 3. Additional hardware to existing courts 643.66 4. Infrastructure in newly set up courts 426.25 5. Virtual Courts 413.08 6. eSewa Kendra 394.48 7. Paperless Court 359.20 8. System and Application Software Development 243.52 9. Solar Power Backup 229.50 10. Video Conferencing set-up 228.48 11. e- filing 215.97 12. Connectivity (Primary + Redundancy) 208.72 13. Capacity Building 208.52 14. CLASS (Courtroom Live-Audio Visual Streaming System) 112.26 15. Human Resources 56.67 16. Future Technological Advancements 53.57 17. Judicial process re-engineering 33.00 18. Disabled friendly ICT enabled facilities 27.54 19. NSTEP 25.75 20. Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) 23.72 21. Knowledge Management System 23.30 22. e-Office for High Courts & District Courts 21.10 23. Integration with Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS) 11.78 24. S3WAAS platform 6.35 TOTAL 7210 The expected outcomes of the scheme are as follows: Citizens who do not have access to technology can access the judicial services from eSewa Kendras, thus bridging the digital divide Digitization of court records lays the foundation for all other digital services in the project. It enables processes to become more environmental friendly by minimizing paper-based filings and reducing the physical movement of documents. Virtual participation in the court proceedings thus reducing costs associated with court proceedings, such as travel expenses for witnesses, judges, and other stakeholders. Payment of court fees, fines and penalties from anywhere, anytime. Expansion of eFiling for reducing the time and effort required to file documents. Thereby minimizing human errors as documents are automatically checked and also prevent further creation of paper based records. Use of latest technologies like AI and its subsets Machine Learning (ML), Optical Character Recognition (OCR), Natural Language Processing (NLP) to provide a smoother user experience by building a “smart” ecosystem. Registries will have less data entry and minimal file scrutiny facilitating better decision-making and policy planning. It envisages smart scheduling, intelligent system that enables data-based decision making for judges and registries, allows for greater predictability and optimisation of the capacity of judges and lawyers. Expansion of virtual courts beyond the adjudication of traffic violation cases, thereby eliminating the presence of litigant or lawyer in the court. Enhanced accuracy and transparency in court proceedings Emphasis on automated delivery of court summons by further expanding the NSTEP (National Serving and Tracking of Electronic Processes), hence drastically reducing the delays in trials. Use of emerging technologies in court processes will make them more efficient and effective, hence contributing significantly towards the reduction of pendency cases. Website Policies Hyperlinking Policy Copyright Policy Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Feedback Contact Us Help FAQ WIM Visitor Summary Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI Developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre , Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology , Government of India Last Updated: Aug 11, 2025 Certified Quality Website

TABLE DATA:
S.No.	Scheme Component	Cost Estimate (Total (In Rs. Cr.)
1.	Scanning, Digitization and Digital Preservation of Case Records	2038.40
2.	Cloud Infrastructure	1205.23
3.	Additional hardware to existing courts	643.66
4.	Infrastructure in newly set up courts	426.25
5.	Virtual Courts	413.08
6.	eSewa Kendra	394.48
7.	Paperless Court	359.20
8.	System and Application Software Development	243.52
9.	Solar Power Backup	229.50
10.	Video Conferencing set-up	228.48
11.	e- filing	215.97
12.	Connectivity (Primary + Redundancy)	208.72
13.	Capacity Building	208.52
14.	CLASS (Courtroom Live-Audio Visual Streaming System)	112.26
15.	Human Resources	56.67
16.	Future Technological Advancements	53.57
17.	Judicial process re-engineering	33.00
18.	Disabled friendly ICT enabled facilities	27.54
19.	NSTEP	25.75
20.	Online Dispute Resolution (ODR)	23.72
21.	Knowledge Management System	23.30
22.	e-Office for High Courts & District Courts	21.10
23.	Integration with Inter-Operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS)	11.78
24.	S3WAAS platform	6.35
	TOTAL	7210