Redressal of Public Grievances | Department of Justice | India Search Search Accessibility Tools Accessibility Tools Color Contrast High Contrast Normal Contrast Highlight Links Invert Saturation Text Size Font Size Increase Font Size Decrease Normal Font Text Spacing Line Height Other controls Screen Reader Hide Images English हिन्दी विधि और न्याय मंत्रालय, भारत सरकार Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India न्याय विभाग DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Menu Toggle More Home About Us History About Department Vision and Mission Functions of Department Organization Chart Administrative Setup Who’s Who Monthly Achievements Citizens’ Charter Acts and Rules Website Information Manager Administration of Justice Appointment of Judges Latest Orders of Appointment, Transfer etc. Memorandum of procedure of appointment of Supreme Court Judges Memorandum of procedure of appointment of High Court Judges List of Supreme Court Judges List of High Court Judges List of Chief Justice of the High Court Vacancy Positions High Courts Principal Seats and benches Justice-I Pay, Allowance and Pension First National Judicial Pay Commission Second National Judicial Pay Commission Memorandum of Understanding signed with other countries Pecuniary Jurisdiction of Delhi District Courts Use of Hindi and regional languages Redressal of Public Grievances Guidelines of Grievances Justice-II Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) About Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) Portal Special Courts for MP/MLA About Special Courts for MP/MLA Portal Sanctions Fast Track Court About Fast Track Court Portal Family Court About Family Court Portal National Judicial Academy About National Judicial Academy Website PFMS National Mission National Mission for Justice Delivery & Legal Reforms Vision Document Advisory Council CSS Judicial Infrastructure – Nyaya Vikas Ease of Doing Business Gram Nyayalaya Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms Vacancy Position in District and Subordinate Courts eCourts MMP Dashboard Phase-I Phase-II Phase-III Composition of eCommittee eCommittee Newsletters eCourts Achievements Computerization and WAN connectivity CIS and COVID Management Software Patch The National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) Virtual Courts Video Conferencing Live Streaming eFiling e-Payments eSewa Kendra eCourt Services Judgment Search Portal National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTEP) Justice Clock Secure, Scalable & Sugamya Website as a Service (S3WAAS) Digitization of Records Information, Education & Communication (IEC) Awards and Recognition MIS Portal for CPCs (Official Use Only) WAN Monitoring Portal (Official Use Only) Training and Awareness Programs PFMS Access to Justice Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice Tele Law About Tele Law Portal Pamphlet In Media Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono Legal Services) About Activities In Media Pamphlet Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono) Portal Legal Literacy & Legal Awareness About IEC Material Brochure Pamphlet Leaflet Webinars In Media Digital Library Information in Different Languages Videos National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) About NALSA Portal Grants-in-aid to NALSA Legal Aid Defense Counsel System (LADCS) Scheme Samvidhan@75 About Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman portal Sabko Nyay- Har Ghar Nyaya Overview Activities Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp Overview Activities Vidhi Jagriti Abhiyan Overview Activities Samvidhan Katta About Guidelines for Submission Media Event National Event Overview Media Gallery 1st Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 2nd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 3rd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 4th Regional Event Overview Media Gallery Gallery Photos Videos Media Corner Press Release Photo Gallery Video Gallery Events Dashboard Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) Tele-Law Other Programmes Others Parliament Questions Notices Recruitments Tenders Right to Information (RTI) PFMS Orders Schemes – Consolidated Guidelines Close Home Administration of Justice Justice-I Redressal of Public Grievances Print Share on Facebook Share on X Share on Linkedin Redressal of Public Grievances Last updated: 03-03-2025 a. Department of Justice (DoJ) receives large number of Citizen’s grievances from citizens through President’s Secretariat/Vice-President’s Secretariat/PMO/directly from the citizens through online CPGRAMS Portal. The Department has been rated as one of the 20 largest grievances receiving Departments by the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances. Besides, large number of grievances is also received through post. b. Department of Justice is mandated to deal with grievances related to appointment of Judges of Supreme Court/High Courts, legal assistance/legal aid/legal awareness/ e-Courts/Judicial Reforms etc. Grievances related to these issues only are dealt with by Department of Justice. c. Grievances related to judiciary are forwarded electronically to the Secretary General, Supreme Court of India/Registrar General of the concerned High Court for further action, as appropriate. A copy is endorsed to the grievance holder for information. d. Grievances received in the Department of Justice are considered and examined by the Judiciary as per their own in house mechanism and the system/procedure to deal with grievances. In such cases, Department of Justice is not in a position to inform the outcome to grievance holders. e. CPGRAMS Version 7.0 has recently been launched in DOJ. The new version aims to reduce the travel time for resolution of a grievance. Citizens can reach to concerned officer responsible for resolution of grievance directly by choosing drop down menu. f. In the month of March 2025 , 1410 grievance were received on CPGRAMS. A total of 1245 grievances were disposed leaving a cumulative pendency of 165. g. Detailed guidelines for disposal of grievances by Department of Justice have been uploaded on website www.doj.gov.in for information/guidance of grievance holders/citizens. Website Policies Hyperlinking Policy Copyright Policy Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Feedback Contact Us Help FAQ WIM Visitor Summary Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI Developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre , Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology , Government of India Last Updated: Aug 11, 2025 Certified Quality Website