Website Policies | Department of Justice | India Search Search Accessibility Tools Accessibility Tools Color Contrast High Contrast Normal Contrast Highlight Links Invert Saturation Text Size Font Size Increase Font Size Decrease Normal Font Text Spacing Line Height Other controls Screen Reader Hide Images English हिन्दी विधि और न्याय मंत्रालय, भारत सरकार Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India न्याय विभाग DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Menu Toggle More Home About Us History About Department Vision and Mission Functions of Department Organization Chart Administrative Setup Who’s Who Monthly Achievements Citizens’ Charter Acts and Rules Website Information Manager Administration of Justice Appointment of Judges Latest Orders of Appointment, Transfer etc. Memorandum of procedure of appointment of Supreme Court Judges Memorandum of procedure of appointment of High Court Judges List of Supreme Court Judges List of High Court Judges List of Chief Justice of the High Court Vacancy Positions High Courts Principal Seats and benches Justice-I Pay, Allowance and Pension First National Judicial Pay Commission Second National Judicial Pay Commission Memorandum of Understanding signed with other countries Pecuniary Jurisdiction of Delhi District Courts Use of Hindi and regional languages Redressal of Public Grievances Guidelines of Grievances Justice-II Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) About Fast Track Special Court (FTSCs) Portal Special Courts for MP/MLA About Special Courts for MP/MLA Portal Sanctions Fast Track Court About Fast Track Court Portal Family Court About Family Court Portal National Judicial Academy About National Judicial Academy Website PFMS National Mission National Mission for Justice Delivery & Legal Reforms Vision Document Advisory Council CSS Judicial Infrastructure – Nyaya Vikas Ease of Doing Business Gram Nyayalaya Scheme for Action Research and Studies on Judicial Reforms Vacancy Position in District and Subordinate Courts eCourts MMP Dashboard Phase-I Phase-II Phase-III Composition of eCommittee eCommittee Newsletters eCourts Achievements Computerization and WAN connectivity CIS and COVID Management Software Patch The National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG) Virtual Courts Video Conferencing Live Streaming eFiling e-Payments eSewa Kendra eCourt Services Judgment Search Portal National Service and Tracking of Electronic Processes (NSTEP) Justice Clock Secure, Scalable & Sugamya Website as a Service (S3WAAS) Digitization of Records Information, Education & Communication (IEC) Awards and Recognition MIS Portal for CPCs (Official Use Only) WAN Monitoring Portal (Official Use Only) Training and Awareness Programs PFMS Access to Justice Designing Innovative Solutions for Holistic Access to Justice Tele Law About Tele Law Portal Pamphlet In Media Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono Legal Services) About Activities In Media Pamphlet Nyaya Bandhu (Pro Bono) Portal Legal Literacy & Legal Awareness About IEC Material Brochure Pamphlet Leaflet Webinars In Media Digital Library Information in Different Languages Videos National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) About NALSA Portal Grants-in-aid to NALSA Legal Aid Defense Counsel System (LADCS) Scheme Samvidhan@75 About Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman Hamara Samvidhan Hamara Samman portal Sabko Nyay- Har Ghar Nyaya Overview Activities Nav Bharat Nav Sankalp Overview Activities Vidhi Jagriti Abhiyan Overview Activities Samvidhan Katta About Guidelines for Submission Media Event National Event Overview Media Gallery 1st Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 2nd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 3rd Regional Event Overview Media Gallery 4th Regional Event Overview Media Gallery Gallery Photos Videos Media Corner Press Release Photo Gallery Video Gallery Events Dashboard Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) Tele-Law Other Programmes Others Parliament Questions Notices Recruitments Tenders Right to Information (RTI) PFMS Orders Schemes – Consolidated Guidelines Close Home Website Policies Print Share on Facebook Share on X Share on Linkedin Website Policies This is the Official website of Department of Justice, designed, developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre (NIC).The site has been developed to provide information to the general public. An attempt has been made through this site to provide reliable, comprehensive, accurate information . Hyperlinks at various places have been provided to other Indian Government Portals/Websites. The content in this site is the result of a collaborative effort of various Groups and Divisions of the Department. It is our endeavour to continue the enhancement and enrichment of this site in terms of content coverage, design and technology on a regular basis. 1. Hyperlinking Policy At many places in this website, you shall find links to other websites/portals. The links have been placed for your convenience. Department of Justice is not responsible for the contents and reliability of the linked websites and does not necessarily endorse the views expressed in them. Mere presence of the link or its listing on this Portal should not be assumed as endorsement of any kind. We cannot guarantee that these links will work all the time and we have no control over availability of linked pages. We do not object to you linking directly to the information that is hosted on this site and no prior permission is required for the same. However, we would like you to inform us about any links provided to this Portal so that you can be informed of any changes or updations therein. Also, we do not permit our pages to be loaded into frames on your site. The pages belonging to this site must load into a newly opened browser window of the User. 2. Copyright Policy Material featured on this Portal may be reproduced free of charge after taking proper permission by sending a mail to us. However, the material has to be reproduced accurately and not to be used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Wherever the material is being published or issued to others, the source must be prominently acknowledged. However, the permission to reproduce this material shall not extend to any material which is identified as being copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material must be obtained from the departments/copyright holders concerned. 3. Privacy Policy Department of Justice does not automatically capture any specific personal information from you, (like name, phone number or e-mail address), that allows us to identify you individually. If the Department of Justice requests you to provide personal information, you will be informed for the particular purposes for which the information is gathered and adequate security measures will be taken to protect your personal information. We do not sell or share any personally identifiable information volunteered on the Website to any third party (public/private). Any information provided to this website will be protected from loss, misuse, unauthorized access or disclosure, alteration, or destruction. We gather certain information about the User, such as Internet protocol (IP) addresses, domain name, browser type, operating system, the date and time of the visit and the pages visited. We make no attempt to link these addresses with the identity of individuals visiting our site unless an attempt to damage the site has been detected. 4. Terms and Conditions This website designed and hosted by National Informatics Centre. Website Content provided by the Department of Justice. Though all efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy and currency of the content on this website, the same should not be construed as a statement of law or used for any legal purposes. Incase of any ambiguity or doubts, users are advised to verify/check with the secretariat and/or other source(s), and to obtain appropriate professional advice. Under no circumstances will this secretariat be liable for any expense, loss or damage including, without limitation, indirect or consequential loss or damage, or any expense, loss or damage whatsoever arising from use, or loss of use, of data, arising out of or in connection with the use of this website. These terms and conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Indian Laws. Any dispute arising under these terms and conditions shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of India. Department of Justice is not responsible for any third-party website that carries its content in any form or manner whatsoever. Website Policies Hyperlinking Policy Copyright Policy Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Feedback Contact Us Help FAQ WIM Visitor Summary Content Owned by DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Ministry of Law and Justice, GOI Developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre , Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology , Government of India Last Updated: Aug 11, 2025 Certified Quality Website